README.md, before:

# AI Log Anomaly Detector

### Example Detection Output
<img width="676" height="256" alt="terminal_screenshot" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d50fc758-ee64-4bd6-9e52-a6ca73193594" />

The model flags statistically unusual authentication events, including invalid user enumeration and off-hours privileged access.

An AI-assisted security project that analyzes Linux authentication logs and identifies suspicious login behavior using machine learning–based anomaly detection. This project simulates how Security Operations Center (SOC) teams detect unusual authentication activity such as brute-force attempts, invalid user access, and off-hours privileged logins.

---

## 🔍 Problem
Modern systems generate thousands of authentication events daily. Manually reviewing logs for suspicious behavior is inefficient and error-prone. SOC teams rely on anomaly detection techniques to surface events that deviate from normal patterns.

This project applies unsupervised machine learning to highlight potentially malicious authentication activity.

---

## 🧠 How It Works
1. Parses Linux-style `auth.log` authentication events
2. Extracts security-relevant features:
   - Login hour
   - Failed vs accepted logins
   - Invalid user attempts
   - User and IP frequency
   - Rolling failed attempts per IP
3. Trains an **Isolation Forest** model to identify anomalous events
4. Flags statistically unusual login activity for review

---

## 🚨 Example Detected Anomalies
- Invalid user enumeration attempts (e.g., `postgres`)
- Off-hours privileged account logins (`root`)
- Rare IP and user access patterns

Detected anomalies are exported to `output/anomalies.csv` for analysis.

---

### Anomaly Report
<img width="1269" height="289" alt="csv_screenshot" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1bfb08d7-a7f3-4608-b11b-bc74b764cf63" />

Detected events are exported to a CSV file for analyst review, including feature values and anomaly scores.

## 🧰 Technologies Used
- Python
- Pandas
- Scikit-learn
- Isolation Forest
- Linux authentication log formats

---

## 🛡 MITRE ATT&CK Mapping
| Technique | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| T1110 | Brute Force |
| T1078 | Valid Accounts |
| T1033 | Account Discovery |

---

## ▶️ How to Run
```bash
python -m venv .venv
.venv\Scripts\activate
pip install pandas scikit-learn
python src/detect_anomalies.py

Commit message:

Document AI usage in anomaly detection
Added section explaining AI usage in detecting anomalies in authentication behavior.

README.md, after:

# AI Log Anomaly Detector

### Example Detection Output
<img width="676" height="256" alt="terminal_screenshot" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d50fc758-ee64-4bd6-9e52-a6ca73193594" />

The model flags statistically unusual authentication events, including invalid user enumeration and off-hours privileged access.

An AI-assisted security project that analyzes Linux authentication logs and identifies suspicious login behavior using machine learning–based anomaly detection. This project simulates how Security Operations Center (SOC) teams detect unusual authentication activity such as brute-force attempts, invalid user access, and off-hours privileged logins.

---

## 🔍 Problem
Modern systems generate thousands of authentication events daily. Manually reviewing logs for suspicious behavior is inefficient and error-prone. SOC teams rely on anomaly detection techniques to surface events that deviate from normal patterns.

This project applies unsupervised machine learning to highlight potentially malicious authentication activity.

---

## 🤖 How AI Is Used
This project uses unsupervised machine learning to detect unusual authentication behavior without relying on predefined attack rules.

An Isolation Forest model is trained on engineered log features (such as login time, event type, user frequency, IP frequency, and recent failed attempts) to learn what normal authentication activity looks like. Events that deviate significantly from these learned patterns are flagged as anomalies.

The model:

Learns baseline behavior using model.fit(X)

Assigns an anomaly score to each event using decision_function()

Flags statistically unusual events using predict() (−1 = anomaly, 1 = normal)

This approach allows the system to surface suspicious login activity—including off-hours privileged access and rare user/IP behavior—even when the login itself is successful.

---

## 🧠 How It Works
1. Parses Linux-style `auth.log` authentication events
2. Extracts security-relevant features:
   - Login hour
   - Failed vs accepted logins
   - Invalid user attempts
   - User and IP frequency
   - Rolling failed attempts per IP
3. Trains an **Isolation Forest** model to identify anomalous events
4. Flags statistically unusual login activity for review

---

## 🚨 Example Detected Anomalies
- Invalid user enumeration attempts (e.g., `postgres`)
- Off-hours privileged account logins (`root`)
- Rare IP and user access patterns

Detected anomalies are exported to `output/anomalies.csv` for analysis.

---

### Anomaly Report
<img width="1269" height="289" alt="csv_screenshot" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1bfb08d7-a7f3-4608-b11b-bc74b764cf63" />

Detected events are exported to a CSV file for analyst review, including feature values and anomaly scores.

## 🧰 Technologies Used
- Python
- Pandas
- Scikit-learn
- Isolation Forest
- Linux authentication log formats

---

## 🛡 MITRE ATT&CK Mapping
| Technique | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| T1110 | Brute Force |
| T1078 | Valid Accounts |
| T1033 | Account Discovery |

---

## ▶️ How to Run
```bash
python -m venv .venv
.venv\Scripts\activate
pip install pandas scikit-learn
python src/detect_anomalies.py
